---
layout: post
title: "Leaving CEJUG’s Leadership Team"
date: 2012-12-31 17:33:00 +0200
categories: cejug community java open source
---

Today is my last day in CEJUG’s leadership team. A journey that lasted for
tireless 8 years or something. I’m not sure about the exact date I became Jug
Leader, but I remember very well that, some time in 2004, I was attending a
CEJUG coordination meeting as a volunteer at Fortes Informática because I was
helping them to organize an event. Right after the meeting, Felipe Gaúcho
invited me to co-lead the group, which was unexpected but very pleasant. I
accepted immediately! Felipe is not among us anymore, but I am eternally
grateful to him for this incredible opportunity.

I’m not leaving because I’m tired or bored. I’m leaving because CEJUG needs
renovation. It needs to change its philosophy, its soul. I’m the oldest one in
the leadership team, thus I’m a dinosaur in terms of community management. My
mind still believes in some practices that don’t work anymore and the community
is not growing as it could grow. Fresh and valuable ideas usually come from new
people with a vision to help others to develop their technical capabilities. I’m
sure there are a lot of people like that out there and I wish they get my place
and move on faster.

There is a CEJUG’s rule that promotes ex-leaders to become advisers for the
leadership team. It is a sort of recognition for the great services provided to
the group. But I’m not accepting even that. To give advices to a future leader
is like bringing back the old way of thinking. That’s what I’m trying to avoid.
Advisers are not so active anyway. I don’t remember the last time I received an
advice from them. Actually, it ended up becoming a definitive leave for them
too. Eventually, my departure will motivate other members of the leadership team
to take the same initiative, if they have the same feeling I’m describing in
this post, of course.

Sometime ago, a friend of mine was excited about CEJUG’s community and he asked
me what he has to do to become a JUG Leader. I told him that it’s not so
difficult, but it requires patience and a lot of work. That’s because CEJUG is a
meritocracy, where you are recognized according to your contribution to the
community. The recognition is basically promoting you to the leadership team,
then you have more power and resources to make things happen. It takes some time
because we wanna make sure that you won’t give up easily and you will just
continue working as hard as before.

The problem is that there is no glamour in the role of Jug Leader. New leaders
probably realized that it’s more a labor of love, donation and dedication than a
professional achievement. Some people love that, like I do, but most people
don’t. Perhaps new leaders won’t find motivation for the merit in this
meritocracy model. The excitement may last for a few months and then, even the
free time will be occupied with other priorities.<br/><b><br/></b><b>I have been
proud of my role as a Jug Leader, not because of what I did for the community,
now and in the past, but because of what I feel for them and what I was willing
to lose for them.</b> I will keep this feeling in my heart. You may ask me why
I’m leaving since I’m still in love. This is like a relationship that doesn't
work. When your love is not reciprocal the best thing you can do is set your
love free.

If you want to be the next CEJUG Leader, be aware of the need for passion,
donation and dedication, with or without professional achievement. In addition
to that, read a very interesting post on John Yeary’s blog about
<a href="http://javaevangelist.blogspot.be/2012/11/what-is-definition-of-jug-leader.html">the definition of a Jug Leader</a>.

By the way, I will continue as a humble CEJUG member, trying to help people
there with their technical questions. Meanwhile, I’m working on a new open
source project! I’m going to launch it here soon and maybe it will end up in a
new, large and successful community!
