My kid came home from school with a new assignment. It was a science project: "Build a mock-up of the Solar System". Science projects are taken very seriously here. The whole family engaged on the task. We first discussed a plan during dinner time. The dimension, the layout to fit all planets, the colors, materials, etc. The next day we went to Michael's, a very expensive shop, still the best place to find everything for crafted works. We found everything we needed to execute the plan.

This is still his science project so he had to do the job, but when things got repetitive he got help from his younger sister, who did a great job painting some planets. One of the challenges was to build the rings of Saturn and Uranus. How to craft a ring that fits exactly the circumference of the sphere of those planets? In a Socratic way, I asked many questions and he was figuring out the steps to craft the rings.

We wanted to discover the radius of the circle so we could use a compass to draw the inner circle of the ring. We needed to find out the circumference of the sphere to apply the formulas:

​    diameter = circumference / pi

​    radius = diameter / 2

But how to measure the circumference if we didn't have a curved ruler or a tape measure?  His idea was to cut tape-sized peaces of a paper sheet, large enough to round the sphere. With a pencil, he marked the exact point where the extremes of the paper-made tape crossed. Then he measured from one extreme to the marked point, using a regular ruler to find the circumference. Applying the found measurement to the formula, we found the diameter. Then he divided the diameter per 2 and found the radius. He used the radius to configure the rods of the compass to draw a circle with the sphere's diameter. He finally expanded the rods to draw the width of the ring. The most exciting part was to see him cutting the paper, getting the ring and seeing it precisely fit the planet. He was so happy, so surprised by the predictability of math. He wasn't expected to do that, but he brought all his calculations to the classroom to show to his teacher, who was also pretty excited to see it.

That's an example of a pretty simple calculation that, when applied to a real problem, can magnify the excitement of a kid for math. They can finally understand that guessing is not as mush exciting than figuring out the precise solution.