---
layout: post
title:  "Swimming"
date: 2017-07-22 18:32:05 +0200
categories: sport
---

I came back from a 10 days vacation in Brazil with 103kg, in August 2016. A
month later, returning to the european diet and getting rid of all the water
retained in my body due to the salty Brazilian food. I've reached 101kg. For my
height, I was clearly obese, feeling unconfortable with my daily life.
Everything was more difficult to do, I was feeling unaturally lasy, umotivated,
heavy. It made me constantly think about going back to the gim, but I was tired
of paying for it in the past without actually going. I thought about buying a
threadmill or an ergonometric bike, but after a while, I know they would become
part of the decoration. I also thought if I wanted to engage in something then
it would need to become a habit or part of my daily routine. I thought about
going to work by bike or walking but it rains a lot here in Belgium, which would
break my routine.

I was out of practical options when I finally thought: what if I go back to 
swimming? I've used to swin a lot when I was a kid. I'm not sure when I started
but I do know when I finished. It was exactly 20 years ago, when I was 17 and 
studing hard for the college admission exams. I also remember why I've started.
My family had a farm with a swimming pool. I regulary invited some friends from
school to swim with me. Since I had that pool to play every weekend, I was 
indeed the fastest one among my friends. Until one of them, known as Gilmar,
started a swimming course to help with his respiratory issues. In a matter of
months Gilmar was beating me in my own pool. That took me totally by surprise.
So, a week later I enrolled to the same swimming course.

Almost instintively, I tried to rank myself in the group. It was frustrating to
know I was only the third one, after Gilmar and Galileu. That's a lot of work 
to do because Galileu was one of those kids that was good in almost every 
discipline. He was in the soccer team, voleiball team, best bike rider, best 
marble player and it goes on and on. In the swimming pool he was in second 
because it was really hard to beat Gilmar, a tall and strong kid with 
remarkable determination. But I was obsessed to beat anyone who threatened me
in my own swimming pool.

It didn't take too long to beat Galileu. A couple of months later I was already
chaising Gilmar, but I actually had to get used to the second place for a long
time. The obsession had dissolved and I started to relax and enjoy swimming as
a passion.

At the age of 15, the destine of most kids is welthy conditions, like myself,
was to continue the studies in a bigger city, with better scholls. But before 
leaving, pushed by family traditions, I had to confirm I was a real catholic in
a serimony known as Crisma. Not a big deal, but these serimonies usually 
requires some preparation that I wasn't happy to engage because, coincidently,
it was happening in the last week of preparationfor my last competition in my
hometown. I had to completly stop training while the other kids were doing 
their best. Up to a certain point, I simply accepted my fate of a mere and 
descrite participation.
